<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a name="chap16"></a>CHAPTER XVI.<br />
A FINAL THREAT</h2>

<p>
On that day, in the colliery of New Aberfoyle, work was going on in the usual
regular way. In the distance could be heard the crash of great charges of
dynamite, by which the carboniferous rocks were blasted. Here masses of coal
were loosened by pick-ax and crowbar; there the perforating machines, with
their harsh grating, bored through the masses of sandstone and schist.
</p>

<p>
Hollow, cavernous noises resounded on all sides. Draughts of air rushed along
the ventilating galleries, and the wooden swing-doors slammed beneath their
violent gusts. In the lower tunnels, trains of trucks kept passing along at the
rate of fifteen miles an hour, while at their approach electric bells warned
the workmen to cower down in the refuge places. Lifts went incessantly up and
down, worked by powerful engines on the surface of the soil. Coal Town was
throughout brilliantly lighted by the electric lamps at full power.
</p>

<p>
Mining operations were being carried on with the greatest activity; coal was
being piled incessantly into the trucks, which went in hundreds to empty
themselves into the corves at the bottom of the shaft. While parties of miners
who had labored during the night were taking needful rest, the others worked
without wasting an hour.
</p>

<p>
Old Simon Ford and Madge, having finished their dinner, were resting at the
door of their cottage. Simon smoked a good pipe of tobacco, and from time to
time the old couple spoke of Nell, of their boy, of Mr. Starr, and wondered how
they liked their trip to the surface of the earth. Where would they be now?
What would they be doing? How could they stay so long away from the mine
without feeling homesick?
</p>

<p>
Just then a terrific roaring noise was heard. It was like the sound of a mighty
cataract rushing down into the mine. The old people rose hastily. They
perceived at once that the waters of Loch Malcolm were rising. A great wave,
unfurling like a billow, swept up the bank and broke against the walls of the
cottage. Simon caught his wife in his arms, and carried her to the upper part
of their dwelling.
</p>

<p>
At the same moment, cries arose from all parts of Coal Town, which was
threatened by a sudden inundation. The inhabitants fled for safety to the top
of the schist rocks bordering the lake; terror spread in all directions; whole
families in frantic haste rushed towards the tunnel in order to reach the upper
regions of the pit.
</p>

<p>
It was feared that the sea had burst into the colliery, for its galleries and
passages penetrated as far as the Caledonian Canal. In that case the entire
excavation, vast as it was, would be completely flooded. Not a single
inhabitant of New Aberfoyle would escape death.
</p>

<p>
But when the foremost fugitives reached the entrance to the tunnel, they
encountered Simon Ford, who had quitted his cottage. &ldquo;Stop, my friends,
stop!&rdquo; shouted the old man; &ldquo;if our town is to be overwhelmed, the
floods will rush faster than you can; no one can possibly escape. But see! the
waters are rising no further! it appears to me the danger is over.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;And our comrades at the far end of the works&mdash;what about
them?&rdquo; cried some of the miners.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;There is nothing to fear for them,&rdquo; replied Simon; &ldquo;they are
working on a higher level than the bed of the loch.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
It was soon evident that the old man was in the right. The sudden influx of
water had rushed to the very lowest bed of the vast mine, and its only ultimate
effect was to raise the level of Loch Malcolm a few feet. Coal Town was
uninjured, and it was reasonable to hope that no one had perished in the flood
of water which had descended to the depths of the mine never yet penetrated by
the workmen.
</p>

<p>
Simon and his men could not decide whether this inundation was owing to the
overflow of a subterranean sheet of water penetrating fissures in the solid
rock, or to some underground torrent breaking through its worn bed, and
precipitating itself to the lowest level of the mine. But that very same
evening they knew what to think about it, for the local papers published an
account of the marvelous phenomenon which Loch Katrine had exhibited.
</p>

<p>
The surprising news was soon after confirmed by the four travelers, who,
returning with all possible speed to the cottage, learned with extreme
satisfaction that no serious damage was done in New Aberfoyle.
</p>

<p>
The bed of Loch Katrine had fairly given way. The waters had suddenly broken
through by an enormous fissure into the mine beneath. Of Sir Walter
Scott&rsquo;s favorite loch there was not left enough to wet the pretty foot of
the Lady of the Lake; all that remained was a pond of a few acres at the
further extremity.
</p>

<p>
This singular event made a profound sensation in the country. It was a thing
unheard of that a lake should in the space of a few minutes empty itself, and
disappear into the bowels of the earth. There was nothing for it but to erase
Loch Katrine from the map of Scotland until (by public subscription) it could
be refilled, care being of course taken, in the first place, to stop the rent
up tight. This catastrophe would have been the death of Sir Walter Scott, had
he still been in the world.
</p>

<p>
The accident was explicable when it was ascertained that, between the bed of
the lake and the vast cavity beneath, the geological strata had become reduced
to a thin layer, incapable of longer sustaining the weight of water.
</p>

<p>
Now, although to most people this event seemed plainly due to natural causes,
yet to James Starr and his friends, Simon and Harry Ford, the question
constantly recurred, was it not rather to be attributed to malevolence? Uneasy
suspicions continually harassed their minds. Was their evil genius about to
renew his persecution of those who ventured to work this rich mine?
</p>

<p>
At the cottage, some days later, James Starr thus discussed the matter with the
old man and his son: &ldquo;Well, Simon,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;to my thinking
we must class this circumstance with the others for which we still seek
elucidation, although it is no doubt possible to explain it by natural
causes.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I am quite of your mind, Mr. James,&rdquo; replied Simon, &ldquo;but
take my advice, and say nothing about it; let us make all researches
ourselves.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Oh, I know the result of such research beforehand!&rdquo; cried the
engineer.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;And what will it be, then?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;We shall find proofs of malevolence, but not the malefactor.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;But he exists! he is there! Where can he lie concealed? Is it possible
to conceive that the most depraved human being could, single-handed, carry out
an idea so infernal as that of bursting through the bed of a lake? I believe I
shall end by thinking, like Jack Ryan, that the evil demon of the mine revenges
himself on us for having invaded his domain.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
Nell was allowed to hear as little as possible of these discussions. Indeed,
she showed no desire to enter into them, although it was very evident that she
shared in the anxieties of her adopted parents. The melancholy in her
countenance bore witness to much mental agitation.
</p>

<p>
It was at length resolved that James Starr, together with Simon and Harry,
should return to the scene of the disaster, and endeavor to satisfy themselves
as to the cause of it. They mentioned their project to no one. To those
unacquainted with the group of facts on which it was based, the opinion of
Starr and his friends could not fail to appear wholly inadmissible.
</p>

<p>
A few days later, the three friends proceeded in a small boat to examine the
natural pillars on which had rested the solid earth forming the basin of Loch
Katrine. They discovered that they had been right in suspecting that the
massive columns had been undermined by blasting. The blackened traces of
explosion were to be seen, the waters having subsided below the level of these
mysterious operations Thus the fall of a portion of the vast vaulted dome was
proved to have been premeditated by man, and by man&rsquo;s hand had it been
effected.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;It is impossible to doubt it,&rdquo; said James Starr; &ldquo;and who
can say what might not have happened had the sea, instead of a little loch,
been let in upon us?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;You may well say that,&rdquo; cried the old overman, with a feeling of
pride in his beloved mine; &ldquo;for nothing less than a sea would have
drowned our Aberfoyle. But, once more, what possible interest could any human
being have in the destruction of our works?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;It is quite incomprehensible,&rdquo; replied James Starr. &ldquo;This
case is something perfectly unlike that of a band of common criminals, who,
concealing themselves in dens and caves, go forth to rob and pillage the
surrounding country. The evil deeds of such men would certainly, in the course
of three years have betrayed their existence and lurking-places. Neither can it
be, as I sometimes used to think, that smugglers or coiners carried on their
illegal practices in some distant and unknown corner of these prodigious
caverns, and were consequently anxious to drive us out of them. But no one
coins false money or obtains contraband goods only to conceal them!
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Yet it is clear that an implacable enemy has sworn the ruin of New
Aberfoyle, and that some interest urges him to seek in every possible way to
wreak his hatred upon us. He appears to be too weak to act openly, and lays his
schemes in secret; but displays such intelligence as to render him a most
formidable foe.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;My friends, he must understand better than we do the secrets of our
domain, since he has all this time eluded our vigilance. He must be a man
experienced in mining, skilled beyond the most skillful&mdash;that&rsquo;s
certain, Simon! We have proof enough of that.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Let me see! Have you never had a personal enemy, to whom your suspicions
might point? Think well! There is such a thing as hatred which time never
softens. Go back to recollections of your earliest days. What befalls us
appears the work of a stern and patient will, and to explain it demands every
effort of thought and memory.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
Simon did not answer immediately&mdash;his mind evidently engaged in a close
and candid survey of his past life. Presently, raising his head,
&ldquo;No,&rdquo; said he; &ldquo;no! Heaven be my witness, neither Madge nor I
have ever injured anybody. We cannot believe that we have a single enemy in the
world.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Ah! if Nell would only speak!&rdquo; cried the engineer.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Mr. Starr&mdash;and you, father,&rdquo; said Harry, &ldquo;I do beg of
you to keep silence on this matter, and not to question my poor Nell. I know
she is very anxious and uneasy; and I feel positive that some great secret
painfully oppresses her heart. Either she knows nothing it would be of any use
for us to hear, or she considers it her duty to be silent. It is impossible to
doubt her affection for us&mdash;for all of us. If at a future time she informs
me of what she has hitherto concealed from us, you shall know about it
immediately.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;So be it, then, Harry,&rdquo; answered the engineer; &ldquo;and yet I
must say Nell&rsquo;s silence, if she knows anything, is to me perfectly
inexplicable.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
Harry would have continued her defense; but the engineer stopped him, saying,
&ldquo;All right, Harry; we promise to say no more about it to your future
wife.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;With my father&rsquo;s consent she shall be my wife without further
delay.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;My boy,&rdquo; said old Simon, &ldquo;your marriage shall take place
this very day month. Mr. Starr, will you undertake the part of Nell&rsquo;s
father?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;You may reckon upon me for that, Simon,&rdquo; answered the engineer.
</p>

<p>
They then returned to the cottage, but said not a word of the result of their
examinations in the mine, so that to the rest of its inhabitants, the bursting
in of the vaulted roof of the caverns continued to be regarded as a mere
accident. There was but a loch the less in Scotland.
</p>

<p>
Nell gradually resumed her customary duties, and Harry made good use of her
little visit to the upper air, in the instructions he gave her. She enjoyed the
recollections of life above ground, yet without regretting it. The somber
region she had loved as a child, and in which her wedded life would be spent,
was as dear to her as ever.
</p>

<p>
The approaching marriage created great excitement in New Aberfoyle. Good wishes
poured in on all sides, and foremost among them were Jack Ryan&rsquo;s. He was
detected busily practicing his best songs in preparation for the great day,
which was to be celebrated by the whole population of Coal Town.
</p>

<p>
During the month preceding the wedding-day, there were more accidents occurring
in New Aberfoyle than had ever been known in the place. One would have thought
the approaching union of Harry and Nell actually provoked one catastrophe after
another. These misfortunes happened chiefly at the further and lowest extremity
of the works, and the cause of them was always in some way mysterious.
</p>

<p>
Thus, for instance, the wood-work of a distant gallery was discovered to be in
flames, which were extinguished by Harry and his companions at the risk of
their lives, by employing engines filled with water and carbonic acid, always
kept ready in case of necessity. The lamp used by the incendiary was found; but
no clew whatever as to who he could be.
</p>

<p>
Another time an inundation took place in consequence of the stanchions of a
water-tank giving way; and Mr. Starr ascertained beyond a doubt that these
supports had first of all been partially sawn through. Harry, who had been
overseeing the works near the place at the time, was buried in the falling
rubbish, and narrowly escaped death.
</p>

<p>
A few days afterwards, on the steam tramway, a train of trucks, which Harry was
passing along, met with an obstacle on the rails, and was overturned. It was
then discovered that a beam had been laid across the line. In short, events of
this description became so numerous that the miners were seized with a kind of
panic, and it required all the influence of their chiefs to keep them on the
works.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;You would think that there was a whole band of these ruffians,&rdquo;
Simon kept saying, &ldquo;and we can&rsquo;t lay hands on a single one of
them.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
Search was made in all directions. The county police were on the alert night
and day, yet discovered nothing. The evil intentions seeming specially designed
to injure Harry. Starr forbade him to venture alone beyond the ordinary limits
of the works.
</p>

<p>
They were equally careful of Nell, although, at Harry&rsquo;s entreaty, these
malicious attempts to do harm were concealed from her, because they might
remind her painfully of former times. Simon and Madge watched over her by day
and by night with a sort of stern solicitude. The poor child yielded to their
wishes, without a remark or a complaint. Did she perceive that they acted with
a view to her interest? Probably she did. And on her part, she seemed to watch
over others, and was never easy unless all whom she loved were together in the
cottage.
</p>

<p>
When Harry came home in the evening, she could not restrain expressions of
child-like joy, very unlike her usual manner, which was rather reserved than
demonstrative. As soon as day broke, she was astir before anyone else, and her
constant uneasiness lasted all day until the hour of return home from work.
</p>

<p>
Harry became very anxious that their marriage should take place. He thought
that, when the irrevocable step was taken, malevolence would be disarmed, and
that Nell would never feel safe until she was his wife. James Starr, Simon, and
Madge, were all of the same opinion, and everyone counted the intervening days,
for everyone suffered from the most uncomfortable forebodings.
</p>

<p>
It was perfectly evident that nothing relating to Nell was indifferent to this
hidden foe, whom it was impossible to meet or to avoid. Therefore it seemed
quite possible that the solemn act of her marriage with Harry might be the
occasion of some new and dreadful outbreak of his hatred.
</p>

<p>
One morning, a week before the day appointed for the ceremony, Nell, rising
early, went out of the cottage before anyone else. No sooner had she crossed
the threshold than a cry of indescribable anguish escaped her lips.
</p>

<p>
Her voice was heard throughout the dwelling; in a moment, Madge, Harry, and
Simon were at her side. Nell was pale as death, her countenance agitated, her
features expressing the utmost horror. Unable to speak, her eyes were riveted
on the door of the cottage, which she had just opened.
</p>

<p>
With rigid fingers she pointed to the following words traced upon it during the
night: &ldquo;Simon Ford, you have robbed me of the last vein in our old pit.
Harry, your son, has robbed me of Nell. Woe betide you! Woe betide you all! Woe
betide New Aberfoyle!&mdash;S<small>ILFAX</small>.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Silfax!&rdquo; exclaimed Simon and Madge together.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Who is this man?&rdquo; demanded Harry, looking alternately at his
father and at the maiden.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Silfax!&rdquo; repeated Nell in tones of despair,
&ldquo;Silfax!&rdquo;&mdash;and, murmuring this name, her whole frame
shuddering with fear and agitation, she was borne away to her chamber by old
Madge.
</p>

<p>
James Starr, hastening to the spot, read the threatening sentences again and
again.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;The hand which traced these lines,&rdquo; said he at length, &ldquo;is
the same which wrote me the letter contradicting yours, Simon. The man calls
himself Silfax. I see by your troubled manner that you know him. Who is this
Silfax?&rdquo;
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
