<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			
<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap10"></a>CHAPTER X.<br />
COAL TOWN</h2>

<p>
Three years after the events which have just been related, the guide-books
recommended as a &ldquo;great attraction,&rdquo; to the numerous tourists who
roam over the county of Stirling, a visit of a few hours to the mines of New
Aberfoyle.
</p>

<p>
No mine in any country, either in the Old or New World, could present a more
curious aspect.
</p>

<p>
To begin with, the visitor was transported without danger or fatigue to a level
with the workings, at fifteen hundred feet below the surface of the ground.
Seven miles to the southwest of Callander opened a slanting tunnel, adorned
with a castellated entrance, turrets and battlements. This lofty tunnel gently
sloped straight to the stupendous crypt, hollowed out so strangely in the
bowels of the earth.
</p>

<p>
A double line of railway, the wagons being moved by hydraulic power, plied from
hour to hour to and from the village thus buried in the subsoil of the county,
and which bore the rather ambitious title of Coal Town.
</p>

<p>
Arrived in Coal Town, the visitor found himself in a place where electricity
played a principal part as an agent of heat and light. Although the ventilation
shafts were numerous, they were not sufficient to admit much daylight into New
Aberfoyle, yet it had abundance of light. This was shed from numbers of
electric discs; some suspended from the vaulted roofs, others hanging on the
natural pillars&mdash;all, whether suns or stars in size, were fed by
continuous currents produced from electro-magnetic machines. When the hour of
rest arrived, an artificial night was easily produced all over the mine by
disconnecting the wires.
</p>

<p>
Below the dome lay a lake of an extent to be compared to the Dead Sea of the
Mammoth caves&mdash;a deep lake whose transparent waters swarmed with eyeless
fish, and to which the engineer gave the name of Loch Malcolm.
</p>

<p>
There, in this immense natural excavation, Simon Ford built his new cottage,
which he would not have exchanged for the finest house in Prince&rsquo;s
Street, Edinburgh. This dwelling was situated on the shores of the loch, and
its five windows looked out on the dark waters, which extended further than the
eye could see. Two months later a second habitation was erected in the
neighborhood of Simon Ford&rsquo;s cottage: this was for James Starr. The
engineer had given himself body and soul to New Aberfoyle, and nothing but the
most imperative necessity ever caused him to leave the pit. There, then, he
lived in the midst of his mining world.
</p>

<p>
On the discovery of the new field, all the old colliers had hastened to leave
the plow and harrow, and resume the pick and mattock. Attracted by the
certainty that work would never fail, allured by the high wages which the
prosperity of the mine enabled the company to offer for labor, they deserted
the open air for an underground life, and took up their abode in the mines.
</p>

<p>
The miners&rsquo; houses, built of brick, soon grew up in a picturesque
fashion; some on the banks of Loch Malcolm, others under the arches which
seemed made to resist the weight that pressed upon them, like the piers of a
bridge. So was founded Coal Town, situated under the eastern point of Loch
Katrine, to the north of the county of Stirling. It was a regular settlement on
the banks of Loch Malcolm. A chapel, dedicated to St. Giles, overlooked it from
the top of a huge rock, whose foot was laved by the waters of the subterranean
sea.
</p>

<p>
When this underground town was lighted up by the bright rays thrown from the
discs, hung from the pillars and arches, its aspect was so strange, so
fantastic, that it justified the praise of the guide-books, and visitors
flocked to see it.
</p>

<p>
It is needless to say that the inhabitants of Coal Town were proud of their
place. They rarely left their laboring village&mdash;in that imitating Simon
Ford, who never wished to go out again. The old overman maintained that it
always rained &ldquo;up there,&rdquo; and, considering the climate of the
United Kingdom, it must be acknowledged that he was not far wrong. All the
families in New Aberfoyle prospered well, having in three years obtained a
certain competency which they could never have hoped to attain on the surface
of the county. Dozens of babies, who were born at the time when the works were
resumed, had never yet breathed the outer air.
</p>

<p>
This made Jack Ryan remark, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s eighteen months since they were
weaned, and they have not yet seen daylight!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
It may be mentioned here, that one of the first to run at the engineer&rsquo;s
call was Jack Ryan. The merry fellow had thought it his duty to return to his
old trade. But though Melrose farm had lost singer and piper it must not be
thought that Jack Ryan sung no more. On the contrary, the sonorous echoes of
New Aberfoyle exerted their strong lungs to answer him.
</p>

<p>
Jack Ryan took up his abode in Simon Ford&rsquo;s new cottage. They offered him
a room, which he accepted without ceremony, in his frank and hearty way. Old
Madge loved him for his fine character and good nature. She in some degree
shared his ideas on the subject of the fantastic beings who were supposed to
haunt the mine, and the two, when alone, told each other stories wild enough to
make one shudder&mdash;stories well worthy of enriching the hyperborean
mythology.
</p>

<p>
Jack thus became the life of the cottage. He was, besides being a jovial
companion, a good workman. Six months after the works had begun, he was made
head of a gang of hewers.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;That was a good work done, Mr. Ford,&rdquo; said he, a few days after
his appointment. &ldquo;You discovered a new field, and though you narrowly
escaped paying for the discovery with your life&mdash;well, it was not too
dearly bought.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;No, Jack, it was a good bargain we made that time!&rdquo; answered the
old overman. &ldquo;But neither Mr. Starr nor I have forgotten that to you we
owe our lives.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Not at all,&rdquo; returned Jack. &ldquo;You owe them to your son Harry,
when he had the good sense to accept my invitation to Irvine.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;And not to go, isn&rsquo;t that it?&rdquo; interrupted Harry, grasping
his comrade&rsquo;s hand. &ldquo;No, Jack, it is to you, scarcely healed of
your wounds&mdash;to you, who did not delay a day, no, nor an hour, that we owe
our being found still alive in the mine!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Rubbish, no!&rdquo; broke in the obstinate fellow. &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t
have that said, when it&rsquo;s no such thing. I hurried to find out what had
become of you, Harry, that&rsquo;s all. But to give everyone his due, I will
add that without that unapproachable goblin&mdash;&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Ah, there we are!&rdquo; cried Ford. &ldquo;A goblin!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;A goblin, a brownie, a fairy&rsquo;s child,&rdquo; repeated Jack Ryan,
&ldquo;a cousin of the Fire-Maidens, an Urisk, whatever you like! It&rsquo;s
not the less certain that without it we should never have found our way into
the gallery, from which you could not get out.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;No doubt, Jack,&rdquo; answered Harry. &ldquo;It remains to be seen
whether this being was as supernatural as you choose to believe.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Supernatural!&rdquo; exclaimed Ryan. &ldquo;But it was as supernatural
as a Will-o&rsquo;-the-Wisp, who may be seen skipping along with his lantern in
his hand; you may try to catch him, but he escapes like a fairy, and vanishes
like a shadow! Don&rsquo;t be uneasy, Harry, we shall see it again some day or
other!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Well, Jack,&rdquo; said Simon Ford, &ldquo;Will-o&rsquo;-the-Wisp or
not, we shall try to find it, and you must help us.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;You&rsquo;ll get into a scrap if you don&rsquo;t take care, Mr.
Ford!&rdquo; responded Jack Ryan.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll see about that, Jack!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
We may easily imagine how soon this domain of New Aberfoyle became familiar to
all the members of the Ford family, but more particularly to Harry. He learnt
to know all its most secret ins and outs. He could even say what point of the
surface corresponded with what point of the mine. He knew that above this seam
lay the Firth of Clyde, that there extended Loch Lomond and Loch Katrine. Those
columns supported a spur of the Grampian mountains. This vault served as a
basement to Dumbarton. Above this large pond passed the Balloch railway. Here
ended the Scottish coast. There began the sea, the tumult of which could be
distinctly heard during the equinoctial gales. Harry would have been a
first-rate guide to these natural catacombs, and all that Alpine guides do on
their snowy peaks in daylight he could have done in the dark mine by the
wonderful power of instinct.
</p>

<p>
He loved New Aberfoyle. Many times, with his lamp stuck in his hat, did he
penetrate its furthest depths. He explored its ponds in a skillfully-managed
canoe. He even went shooting, for numerous birds had been introduced into the
crypt&mdash;pintails, snipes, ducks, who fed on the fish which swarmed in the
deep waters. Harry&rsquo;s eyes seemed made for the dark, just as a
sailor&rsquo;s are made for distances. But all this while Harry felt
irresistibly animated by the hope of finding the mysterious being whose
intervention, strictly speaking, had saved himself and his friends. Would he
succeed? He certainly would, if presentiments were to be trusted; but certainly
not, if he judged by the success which had as yet attended his researches.
</p>

<p>
The attacks directed against the family of the old overman, before the
discovery of New Aberfoyle, had not been renewed.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
