<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			
<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap11"></a>CHAPTER XI.<br />
HANGING BY A THREAD</h2>

<p>
Although in this way the Ford family led a happy and contented life, yet it was
easy to see that Harry, naturally of a grave disposition, became more and more
quiet and reserved. Even Jack Ryan, with all his good humor and usually
infectious merriment, failed to rouse him to gayety of manner.
</p>

<p>
One Sunday&mdash;it was in the month of June&mdash;the two friends were walking
together on the shores of Loch Malcolm. Coal Town rested from labor. In the
world above, stormy weather prevailed. Violent rains fell, and dull sultry
vapors brooded over the earth; the atmosphere was most oppressive.
</p>

<p>
Down in Coal Town there was perfect calm; no wind, no rain. A soft and pleasant
temperature existed instead of the strife of the elements which raged without.
What wonder then, that excursionists from Stirling came in considerable numbers
to enjoy the calm fresh air in the recesses of the mine?
</p>

<p>
The electric discs shed a brilliancy of light which the British sun, oftener
obscured by fogs than it ought to be, might well envy. Jack Ryan kept talking
of these visitors, who passed them in noisy crowds, but Harry paid very little
attention to what he said.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I say, do look, Harry!&rdquo; cried Jack. &ldquo;See what numbers of
people come to visit us! Cheer up, old fellow! Do the honors of the place a
little better. If you look so glum, you&rsquo;ll make all these outside folks
think you envy their life above-ground.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Never mind me, Jack,&rdquo; answered Harry. &ldquo;You are jolly enough
for two, I&rsquo;m sure; that&rsquo;s enough.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be hanged if I don&rsquo;t feel your melancholy creeping over
me though!&rdquo; exclaimed Jack. &ldquo;I declare my eyes are getting quite
dull, my lips are drawn together, my laugh sticks in my throat; I&rsquo;m
forgetting all my songs. Come, man, what&rsquo;s the matter with you?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;You know well enough, Jack.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;What? the old story?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Yes, the same thoughts haunt me.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Ah, poor fellow!&rdquo; said Jack, shrugging his shoulders. &ldquo;If
you would only do like me, and set all the queer things down to the account of
the goblins of the mine, you would be easier in your mind.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;But, Jack, you know very well that these goblins exist only in your
imagination, and that, since the works here have been reopened, not a single
one has been seen.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;That&rsquo;s true, Harry; but if no spirits have been seen, neither has
anyone else to whom you could attribute the extraordinary doings we want to
account for.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I shall discover them.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Ah, Harry! Harry! it&rsquo;s not so easy to catch the spirits of New
Aberfoyle!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I shall find out the spirits as you call them,&rdquo; said Harry, in a
tone of firm conviction.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Do you expect to be able to punish them?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Both punish and reward. Remember, if one hand shut us up in that
passage, another hand delivered us! I shall not soon forget that.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;But, Harry, how can we be sure that these two hands do not belong to the
same body?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;What can put such a notion in your head, Jack?&rdquo; asked Harry.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Well, I don&rsquo;t know. Creatures that live in these holes, Harry,
don&rsquo;t you see? they can&rsquo;t be made like us, eh?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;But they <i>are</i> just like us, Jack.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Oh, no! don&rsquo;t say that, Harry! Perhaps some madman managed to get
in for a time.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;A madman! No madman would have formed such connected plans, or done such
continued mischief as befell us after the breaking of the ladders.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Well, but anyhow he has done no harm for the last three years, either to
you, Harry, or any of your people.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;No matter, Jack,&rdquo; replied Harry; &ldquo;I am persuaded that this
malignant being, whoever he is, has by no means given up his evil intentions. I
can hardly say on what I found my convictions. But at any rate, for the sake of
the new works, I must and will know who he is and whence he comes.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;For the sake of the new works did you say?&rdquo; asked Jack,
considerably surprised.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I said so, Jack,&rdquo; returned Harry. &ldquo;I may be mistaken, but,
to me, all that has happened proves the existence of an interest in this mine
in strong opposition to ours. Many a time have I considered the matter; I feel
almost sure of it. Just consider the whole series of inexplicable
circumstances, so singularly linked together. To begin with, the anonymous
letter, contradictory to that of my father, at once proves that some man had
become aware of our projects, and wished to prevent their accomplishment. Mr.
Starr comes to see us at the Dochart pit. No sooner does he enter it with me
than an immense stone is cast upon us, and communication is interrupted by the
breaking of the ladders in the Yarrow shaft. We commence exploring. An
experiment, by which the existence of a new vein would be proved, is rendered
impossible by stoppage of fissures. Notwithstanding this, the examination is
carried out, the vein discovered. We return as we came, a prodigious gust of
air meets us, our lamp is broken, utter darkness surrounds us. Nevertheless, we
make our way along the gloomy passage until, on reaching the entrance, we find
it blocked up. There we were&mdash;imprisoned. Now, Jack, don&rsquo;t you see
in all these things a malicious intention? Ah, yes, believe me, some being
hitherto invisible, but not supernatural, as you will persist in thinking, was
concealed in the mine. For some reason, known only to himself, he strove to
keep us out of it. <i>Was</i> there, did I say? I feel an inward conviction
that he <i>is</i> there still, and probably prepares some terrible disaster for
us. Even at the risk of my life, Jack, I am resolved to discover him.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
Harry spoke with an earnestness which strongly impressed his companion.
&ldquo;Well, Harry,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;if I am forced to agree with you in
certain points, won&rsquo;t you admit that some kind fairy or brownie, by
bringing bread and water to you, was the means of&mdash;&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Jack, my friend,&rdquo; interrupted Harry, &ldquo;it is my belief that
the friendly person, whom you will persist in calling a spirit, exists in the
mine as certainly as the criminal we speak of, and I mean to seek them both in
the most distant recesses of the mine.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;But,&rdquo; inquired Jack, &ldquo;have you any possible clew to guide
your search?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Perhaps I have. Listen to me! Five miles west of New Aberfoyle, under
the solid rock which supports Ben Lomond, there exists a natural shaft which
descends perpendicularly into the vein beneath. A week ago I went to ascertain
the depth of this shaft. While sounding it, and bending over the opening as my
plumb-line went down, it seemed to me that the air within was agitated, as
though beaten by huge wings.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Some bird must have got lost among the lower galleries,&rdquo; replied
Jack.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;But that is not all, Jack. This very morning I went back to the place,
and, listening attentively, I thought I could detect a sound like a sort of
groaning.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Groaning!&rdquo; cried Jack, &ldquo;that must be nonsense; it was a
current of air&mdash;unless indeed some ghost&mdash;&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;I shall know to-morrow what it was,&rdquo; said Harry.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;To-morrow?&rdquo; answered Jack, looking at his friend.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Yes; to-morrow I am going down into that abyss.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Harry! that will be a tempting of Providence.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;No, Jack, Providence will aid me in the attempt. Tomorrow, you and some
of our comrades will go with me to that shaft. I will fasten myself to a long
rope, by which you can let me down, and draw me up at a given signal. I may
depend upon you, Jack?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Well, Harry,&rdquo; said Jack, shaking his head, &ldquo;I will do as you
wish me; but I tell you all the same, you are very wrong.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Nothing venture nothing win,&rdquo; said Harry, in a tone of decision.
&ldquo;To-morrow morning, then, at six o&rsquo;clock. Be silent, and
farewell!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
It must be admitted that Jack Ryan&rsquo;s fears were far from groundless.
Harry would expose himself to very great danger, supposing the enemy he sought
for lay concealed at the bottom of the pit into which he was going to descend.
It did not seem likely that such was the case, however.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Why in the world,&rdquo; repeated Jack Ryan, &ldquo;should he take all
this trouble to account for a set of facts so very easily and simply explained
by the supernatural intervention of the spirits of the mine?&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
But, notwithstanding his objections to the scheme, Jack Ryan and three miners
of his gang arrived next morning with Harry at the mouth of the opening of the
suspicious shaft. Harry had not mentioned his intentions either to James Starr
or to the old overman. Jack had been discreet enough to say nothing.
</p>

<p>
Harry had provided himself with a rope about 200 feet long. It was not
particularly thick, but very strong&mdash;sufficiently so to sustain his
weight. His friends were to let him down into the gulf, and his pulling the
cord was to be the signal to withdraw him.
</p>

<p>
The opening into this shaft or well was twelve feet wide. A beam was thrown
across like a bridge, so that the cord passing over it should hang down the
center of the opening, and save Harry from striking against the sides in his
descent.
</p>

<p>
He was ready.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Are you still determined to explore this abyss?&rdquo; whispered Jack
Ryan.
</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Yes, I am, Jack.&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
The cord was fastened round Harry&rsquo;s thighs and under his arms, to keep
him from rocking. Thus supported, he was free to use both his hands. A
safety-lamp hung at his belt, also a large, strong knife in a leather sheath.
</p>

<p>
Harry advanced to the middle of the beam, around which the cord was passed.
Then his friends began to let him down, and he slowly sank into the pit. As the
rope caused him to swing gently round and round, the light of his lamp fell in
turns on all points of the side walls, so that he was able to examine them
carefully. These walls consisted of pit coal, and so smooth that it would be
impossible to ascend them.
</p>

<p>
Harry calculated that he was going down at the rate of about a foot per second,
so that he had time to look about him, and be ready for any event.
</p>

<p>
During two minutes&mdash;that is to say, to the depth of about 120 feet, the
descent continued without any incident.
</p>

<p>
No lateral gallery opened from the side walls of the pit, which was gradually
narrowing into the shape of a funnel. But Harry began to feel a fresher air
rising from beneath, whence he concluded that the bottom of the pit
communicated with a gallery of some description in the lowest part of the mine.
</p>

<p>
The cord continued to unwind. Darkness and silence were complete. If any living
being whatever had sought refuge in the deep and mysterious abyss, he had
either left it, or, if there, by no movement did he in the slightest way betray
his presence.
</p>

<p>
Harry, becoming more suspicious the lower he got, now drew his knife and held
it in his right hand. At a depth of 180 feet, his feet touched the lower point
and the cord slackened and unwound no further.
</p>

<p>
Harry breathed more freely for a moment. One of the fears he entertained had
been that, during his descent, the cord might be cut above him, but he had seen
no projection from the walls behind which anyone could have been concealed.
</p>

<p>
The bottom of the abyss was quite dry. Harry, taking the lamp from his belt,
walked round the place, and perceived he had been right in his conjectures.
</p>

<p>
An extremely narrow passage led aside out of the pit. He had to stoop to look
into it, and only by creeping could it be followed; but as he wanted to see in
which direction it led, and whether another abyss opened from it, he lay down
on the ground and began to enter it on hands and knees.
</p>

<p>
An obstacle speedily arrested his progress. He fancied he could perceive by
touching it, that a human body lay across the passage. A sudden thrill of
horror and surprise made him hastily draw back, but he again advanced and felt
more carefully.
</p>

<p>
His senses had not deceived him; a body did indeed lie there; and he soon
ascertained that, although icy cold at the extremities, there was some vital
heat remaining. In less time than it takes to tell it, Harry had drawn the body
from the recess to the bottom of the shaft, and, seizing his lamp, he cast its
lights on what he had found, exclaiming immediately, &ldquo;Why, it is a
child!&rdquo;
</p>

<p>
The child still breathed, but so very feebly that Harry expected it to cease
every instant. Not a moment was to be lost; he must carry this poor little
creature out of the pit, and take it home to his mother as quickly as he could.
He eagerly fastened the cord round his waist, stuck on his lamp, clasped the
child to his breast with his left arm, and, keeping his right hand free to hold
the knife, he gave the signal agreed on, to have the rope pulled up.
</p>

<p>
It tightened at once; he began the ascent. Harry looked around him with
redoubled care, for more than his own life was now in danger.
</p>

<p>
For a few minutes all went well, no accident seemed to threaten him, when
suddenly he heard the sound of a great rush of air from beneath; and, looking
down, he could dimly perceive through the gloom a broad mass arising until it
passed him, striking him as it went by.
</p>

<p>
It was an enormous bird&mdash;of what sort he could not see; it flew upwards on
mighty wings, then paused, hovered, and dashed fiercely down upon Harry, who
could only wield his knife in one hand. He defended himself and the child as
well as he could, but the ferocious bird seemed to aim all its blows at him
alone. Afraid of cutting the cord, he could not strike it as he wished, and the
struggle was prolonged, while Harry shouted with all his might in hopes of
making his comrades hear.
</p>

<p>
He soon knew they did, for they pulled the rope up faster; a distance of about
eighty feet remained to be got over. The bird ceased its direct attack, but
increased the horror and danger of his situation by rushing at the cord,
clinging to it just out of his reach, and endeavoring, by pecking furiously, to
cut it.
</p>

<p>
Harry felt overcome with terrible dread. One strand of the rope gave way, and
it made them sink a little.
</p>

<p>
A shriek of despair escaped his lips.
</p>

<p>
A second strand was divided, and the double burden now hung suspended by only
half the cord.
</p>

<p>
Harry dropped his knife, and by a superhuman effort succeeded, at the moment
the rope was giving way, in catching hold of it with his right hand above the
cut made by the beak of the bird. But, powerfully as he held it in his iron
grasp, he could feel it gradually slipping through his fingers.
</p>

<p>
He might have caught it, and held on with both hands by sacrificing the life of
the child he supported in his left arm. The idea crossed him, but was banished
in an instant, although he believed himself quite unable to hold out until
drawn to the surface. For a second he closed his eyes, believing they were
about to plunge back into the abyss.
</p>

<p>
He looked up once more; the huge bird had disappeared; his hand was at the very
extremity of the broken rope&mdash;when, just as his convulsive grasp was
failing, he was seized by the men, and with the child was placed on the level
ground.
</p>

<p>
The fearful strain of anxiety removed, a reaction took place, and Harry fell
fainting into the arms of his friends.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
